Israel says it has delivered enough
polio vaccines for more than a million
people in Gaza the vaccine shipment
started after the first case of the
deadly disease was found after a quarter
Century it's unclear how the vaccines
would be distributed and administered in
the war torn territory Aid groups plan
on vaccinating more than 600,000
children and have called for a ceasefire
to allow them to start their vaccination
campaign
immediately it's bringing Dr John Kaylor
he's the co-founder of the NGO met
Global and a pediatrician who's visited
Gaza multiple times this year already Dr
Kaylor welcome to DW now how dangerous
would a large scale polio outbreak be in
a war zone like
Gaza well first of all thank you for the
thank you for the invite uh a large
scale outbreak of polio would be a very
very significant event it would be both
a significant monitor of a bad Public
Health event as well as a medical
catastrophe uh there hasn't been a case
of polio in Gaza in 25 years and for 20
years before that the cases were
diminishing so there's very few people
there that have experienced this and
when they did they experienced it at a
time when there was a better Public
Health uh infrastructure there is zero
Public Health infrastructure now yeah
are the amounts of vaccine available
enough to contain a major
outbreak if there's a million doses of
vaccine it's it's it's enough to contain
a contain an outbreak the issue isn't
amount of vaccine there's plenty of
vaccine in the world and there'll be
plenty of people to give it the issue is
the safety in giving it how you're going
to give it uh and then the repeat doses
uh because it's not an issue of one and
done it's an issue for those kids who
have not been vaccinated it's an issue
of two doses separated by 6 to 8 weeks
so to what extent would a successful
vaccination campaign be possible if
fighting continued at its current
intensity
then well I can't estimate that but
certainly the issue is uh an issue of
safety if you've got a group of people
that are afraid for their lives and you
tell them there's a potential of a
disease that may harm them if they come
to a certain area to get the the vaccine
most people are going to opt to stay
safe so it's going to be an extremely
difficult situation both from a public
health messaging standpoint but also a
very very scary situation for for those
Personnel that are there to administer
the vaccine uh given that they will be
uh depending on this whole concept of
deconfliction and we know how how
fraught that is with mistake yeah can
you explain to us how the war and the
humanitarian situation are making it
easier for diseases like polio but
others as well to spread in Gaza
so um most contagious diseases are um a
function of
congestion um there are some that are
easily contagious such as respiratory
diseases like covid measles uh and then
there are some that are contagious
because of breakdown in hygiene and
that's oral feal that's hand the mouth
um there is no adequate hygiene in Gaza
zero um so people even when they clean
their kid they clean their kids diaper
and stuff like that they won't be
washing their hands they'll be touching
their own mouth they'll be spreading it
polio vaccine is also a type of vaccine
that can live off the body so it'll be
in the soil it'll be in the water um um
and easily spread with lack of with with
poor with poor gastrointestinal hygiene
because it goes hand to
mouth now many countries spent decades
trying to eradicate polio and doing so
successfully now if it really gained a
foothold in Gaza how easily could it
spread
internationally well it can the the
there's no question that the virus will
go internationally that's not a question
um anybody who's been in the Gaza Strip
who has worked intimately for any period
of time um uh with the patients that
have it some of those people will carry
it the it's an extremely contagious
disease meaning it goes it's easily
spread but the good thing about it is
that it can be broken by by uh um what's
called herd immunity and most countries
most countries in the world other than a
certain subset of them have our have HT
immunity one of the worries is for
vulnerable populations so there are
populations that for religious reasons
or ethical reasons or whatever reasons
don't get their children uh vaccinated
all of those children will be
susceptible if the virus gets into that
sub Community those communities are
usually pretty localized so if you can
keep it out of those communities you'll
be all right the general population the
general population will be pretty well
protected around the world that is Dr
John Kaylor he's the co-founder of the
NGO met Global thank you so much for
your time and those very interesting
insights you're very welcome and thank
you so much for having me